Hey folks, Intel is a
sponsor this week and I
welcome them because they're bringing
some high performance developer tools
for all of us. Check
out Intel's parallel studio X,
E I've talked about parallelism
before on the show and
the importance of using the
complete instruction set, unlocking the
power of the process or
that your code is running
on. Now, you all might
be writing C or C
plus plus Python or even
Fortran, but as your code
building in such a way
and written in such a
way that it uses the
latest techniques for vectorization multithreading
multi-node parallelization or memory optimization.
Intel parallel studio XE has
a lot of new stuff
for 2018 across all these
languages. Get a free download
at  dot com slash
parallels studio X, Z, or
certainly go and Google or
Google with being for Intel
parallel studio XE and get
started. Boosting your apps performance
with smart parallel code with
a lot less effort. Check
them out. bitly.com/parallel studio X
E. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with John Alexander. He's a gamer
and a content developer, and
we're talking to him about
the Xbox adaptive controller. How
are you, sir? Wonderful, sir.
Thanks for taking the time
to talk to me about
this. Yeah, so this is
out now. I can go
and buy the Xbox adaptive
controller for, for 99 bucks
or a hundred bucks, U
S a in stores or
Microsoft stores. Yes, somehow I
thought it would be more
expensive. Like I thought it
would be like a thing.
Like it would be hundreds
of dollars. It would be
X-Box priced, but that seems
like a very reasonable price
for something that's gonna open
up gaming for a lot
of people. Oh yes. One
of the things when the
X-Box adaptive controller had been
announced, it was still in
development when they actually announced
the price. It blew everyone's
mind because normally when you
have accessibility issues and you
need to get special equipment
for that, that can run
in the hundreds and hundreds
of dollars, very easily for
some of the modified controllers.
And so with the accessible
controller, it allows you to
get what you need for
a very small price. Yeah.
It's, it's, it's amazing. So
what is your mobility issue?
So my mobility issue is
what they call hemiplegia. And
what that means is that
your entire one side of
your body is affected. So
all the systems on my
right side, actually, and you
may be able to tell
I have a slight list,
but because it even affects
the side of my tongue
a little bit, everything on
my right side is affected,
Including I have, I wear
a size seven and a
half shoe on my right
and a nine and a
half on my left. And,
And there's a hemiplegia. It
means like hemisphere Hemp, like
quadriplegia or hemiplegia, it means
that the hemisphere, the entire
hemisphere, or how am I
sighed, I guess never really
thought about that, but is,
is totally affected. So I
have really no fine control
on my right side, on
my right hand at all.
So I type with one
hand and do pretty much
everything with one hand. But
when you're playing Xbox games,
typically you need two hands.
There's two triggers. There's two,
two joysticks. There's the deep
head there's buttons. There's, you
know, upper triggers, there's lower
triggers. And it can be
frustrating for people with mobility
issues or, you know, sensory
issues or, you know, vision
or something like that. And
they can't really play. So
using the accessibility controller allows
you to plug in all
sorts of external controllers so
that you can use. So
for example, I use to,
X-Box not X-Box to rock
band drum pedals for my
triggers. You haven't really Okay.
So I have rock band
and the, the rock band,
orange drum pedal, it's like
the, the, you know, controller
it's orange and I got
it at Goodwill and it
has a 3.5 millimeter. It
looks like a headphone Jack
on the end of it.
Right? And so you can
plug in on the back
of the controller itself, there
are 3.5 millimeter controllers for
jacks for the controllers, and
pretty much any button, any
trigger has a spot along
the back that you can
plug in. And the reason
they did that, it's all
in a line so that
people with mobility issues or
dexterity issues, it's not, you
know, they're not like a
stacked one on top of
the other, anything. They worked
a long time with different
agencies, different charities to really
work out the design on
this. And it was one
of the, the, the things
out of the inclusive technology
lab. And I don't know
Scott, if you've ever been
there, but it's an amazing,
amazing place that, that they,
that they do the designs
for, for things like the
accessible controller. And I know
that several other companies and
organizations have used the expertise
now of the inclusive technologies
lab for different, for different
offerings. Well, well, before we
get the, like the techie
Parts of how it works
and what it does, let
me back up a second.
You've been a gamer for
years though. I mean, I've
known, I've known you for,
I don't know, 15 years,
how were you playing Xbox
before? I was usually the
standard meat, meat target for
my kids inhaler, you know,
I was the practice dummy.
So I would, you know,
like for example, if you're
trying to play something that,
that needs both joysticks, I
would typically, you know, either
turn the controller around sometimes
or put it on the
side and then hit it
with one part, you know,
and then try to move
a little bit with the
other. So, like, for example,
in the first person shooter
games, you have the navigation
where you're running around with
your feet, but then you
twist at the waist with
the other one. And that's
where I would usually have
the problem. I'd have to
move and then quickly twists
with their waist. And by
that point, you know, I'm
spawning again. So, so for
the most part, for quite
a while, I haven't played
console based games. I've just
played PC based games. And,
And then how did you
do that? Was it because
the PC you've got the
keyboard and the mouse and
you can rearrange things, maybe
move the mouse to the
right side, but you're still
only trying to do all
of this with just right,
Right. And you're still doing
it with basically one hand.
You can use the, you
can use some of the,
like on the keyboard, the
arrow controllers, or, you know,
WASD or something like that
with your other hand somewhat,
and then move the mouse
or whatever you need to,
but still, it's a, it's
kind of frustrating sometimes. And
so being able to do
that, you know, you kind
of pick and choose the
games you want to play.
So I've been, you know,
for a long time and
playing things like Civ and,
and those sorts of things,
which aren't as much of
a Twitch game as, as
other things. So there's a
huge gaming community though, out
there before the Xbox, at
draft of controller, that would
just basically say, we're going
to solve this now. Whether,
whether we have support from
a company or not, right.
There's like the able gamers
charity and there's special effect.
And there's cerebral palsy foundation.
People were building solutions. I've
seen out of wood and
tape and wires that they
made themselves. And, and this
was a, a very DIY
community. Like they, they were
gonna, they were in a
game and no one's going
to let them, no, one's
going to stop them. Right.
Right. In fact, that's a
good point. Back in the
early eighties, when I had
my Atari, there was a,
an article in an Atari
age at the time that
showed you how to unscrew
it and then rear rewire
the circuit board. So you
could make it a left
handed controller. Wow. So I
did that so that I
could use the fire button
on the left hand side.
But yeah, there were so
many, there have been so
many charities and people just
spending their own time as
bankers to help other people
modify different controllers or hook
them up to a, maybe
a breath like a straw.
So you could use that
for the fire button or
something like that to allow
people to escape the prison,
if you will, or the,
the frustration of having a
body that a mind that's
trapped inside that's mobility limited,
limited body . Yeah. And
I understand that a couple
of a couple of years
ago, the kind of famous
modern Ben heck B E
N H E C K
created X-Box one single handed
controllers, which solves problem for
a single handed person. But
there's a, there's a diversity
of limited mobility issues, right.
Someone might not simply have
only one arm, you know,
like you, you can use
your other hand to do
some stuff. Like it could
be a trigger hand. Right,
Right. It's a, I can
use it to grasp, I
can use it on anything,
you know, of course, a
course ability, not finally I
can grasp so I can,
you know, use it for
a, for a trigger it's
just harder to do, especially
with the, the way that
the is molded. But it's
really interesting because the way
that the, the adaptive controller
came about was in 2014.
And I don't remember who
it was that was scrolling
through Twitter, but they were,
they saw a tweet by
warfighter engaged. Who's a nonprofit
organization that provides gaming devices
to wounded vets. And so
they saw that saw this
photo and they reached out
to that two warfighter and
started learning how difficult it
was. And, and so there
was a hackathon at the
2015 ability summit, and a
group of employees decided to
put together a team to
develop a solution for accessible
gaming. And so they worked
with Ken Jones, who's the,
the leader of warfighter engaged.
And they developed at that
point, a gaming device that
used connect to track a
gamer's movements and translated translate
them as if they were
inputs from a traditional wireless
controller. Wow. And it does
make you wonder though why
it took so long. Like
if you were hacking your
Atari in the eighties, doesn't
it feel like this, this
should have been a thing
a long time ago? Yeah.
I think part of it
is, is that, you know,
sometimes people are just going
about their lives and they
just, they don't see it.
And, you know, it's, it's
not that it's good or
bad or anything. They just
don't see it. I think
a really, a lot of
companies now for whatever reason
are really trying to focus
on accessibility. I mean, if
you look at Tommy Hilfiger
now has a line of
Tommy accessible clothing. And so
they have magnetic clasps for
your buttons for your shirt.
So it still looks like
buttons on a, on a
dress shirt, but it's actually
a magnetic class. And Nike,
I tried these on and
they didn't work for me,
but they have as part
of their flies, their fly
line, a high top that
zips all the way around
with Velcro. See that you
can basically, instead of using
shoestrings, you can zip all
the way around it and
close it, it kind of
opens it. It kind of
opens the shoe up and
then kind of zips it
around there. So Small, small,
and clever design things that
can fundamentally change how someone
is able to just move
through their, their everyday life.
Like this is absolutely, this
is just a, it's the
organizational willpower to do it.
And that's why, you know,
one of the reasons why
I love Microsoft because they,
they decided to do this.
They put, you know, they
put their money where their
mouth was and created something
that's very affordable and very,
very flexible. You can use
it on both the piece
on both windows 10 and
on the Xbox itself. And
so you can configure it
however you need to. In
fact, it has oversized buttons
to oversized buttons, and I've
got two other oversized buttons.
So I just took a
picture of a regular Xbox
controller with the X, Y
AB blew it up and
then put it on the
buttons and created that diamond,
that diamond configuration and use
it, use the button. So
that way with my right
hand. Interesting. So we're on
a podcast, of course. So
people will have to go
and link and go and
search for images for this,
but let's describe it. It
looks like it looks like
a DJ turntable. It's, it's
a white rectangle. It's a
very attractive controller. It matches
the Xbox style with two
big black buttons on it
that are several inches wide
that looked like they could
be turntables, but they're actually
buttons. There's a, a small
D pad, presumably for setup
starting start and select buttons,
but it's rather, it's rather
Spartan, but if you flip
it around on the backside,
there's 19 3.5 millimeter jacks
and multiple USB ports. This
is not a controller as
it is a controller toolkit.
Right. Right. And that's the
main thing is that it's
not necessarily the controller itself,
but it's almost, I don't
want to say it's a
framework, but it's a platform.
It's an ecosystem. Right. Right.
And the interesting thing about
it is on the controller
itself. Yes. It has a
deep pad and you can
map the Xbox controller deep
pad to that, right. The
pad, You can also then
using a technology also that
came out, I think in
like 2014 or 2015 called
copilot and copilot is an
Xbox technology that allows two
controllers to work as one.
Right. And that's a software
based thing. I've actually done
that with my kids before
they, right before they became
able to really play, you
know, I could move the
head of the character and
they could move the body
kind of thing. Right. And
in the same way, the
accessible controller takes advantage of
using copilot. You can, you
can use it with a
regular controller and then map
from that controller onto. So
if you want to use,
you know, in one hand
you want to use the
controller and then the big
buttons of the accessible controller,
you can absolutely do that.
And there's a little button
on the X on the
accessible controller with three lights
next to it. And those
are for the mapping profiles
that you use. So you
get into the Xbox and
you turn on copilot and
it says, okay, do you
want to map these things?
And so like, for example,
I've mapped the right joystick
to the D pad on
the accessible controller. So you
can map anything to anything,
right. And on the back
of these, these 3.5 millimeter
devices, this is basically a
headphone Jack, but it's, it's
not for headphones. If you
we've all looked at these,
these, these plugs before they
usually have stripes, there's either
like a, a mano or
a digital input, there's a
stereo or three stripes. And
you can use those for,
for digital, like a button
pushing it on and off,
or for analog things like
joysticks and it'll support all
of these different things where
switches or buttons totally up
to you. So you can
do remapping and software and
physical mapping in hardware. Yes.
So that means that like
this, this button that you
have, the, the, the one
from rock band, is that
an on, off, or is
that a trigger where you
could push it slightly? And
it's like an analog We're
going to put a, you
can push it slightly. It's
when you plug the pedal
into the back of the
controller for, it has a
little symbol for right trigger.
You can plug that, you
plug that right in there.
And yeah, it's, it is,
I believe it's an, it's
gotta be analog because it,
it totally handles the pressure.
Just, just, That's amazing. It's
just a big foot trigger.
And if I'm putting all
of this in the show
notes, because I want people
to see these, if they
can, it's pretty amazing. It's,
it's an ecosystem because it's
open and it's not being
prescriptive. And I think this
is important. The adaptive controller
is not saying use it
like this. It's just a,
it's a series of ports
and possibilities. And if you
go on the show notes
and look at our, under
a system, these are the
accessories you can get. Like
you can Mount it to
your leg. You can Mount
it to your wheelchair, wheelchair,
arm, mounts for the controller
itself, or, you know, mounting
it in any way that
you want. So there's a
whole ecosystem around it. One
of these ones that's really
interesting is called the quad
stick. So it's a sip
and puff mouth stick that
can be used, right. To,
to map directly to the
Xbox controller. If you want
to fire with your mouth,
you can do that. I
believe there's also, somebody makes
a tracking device that you
can use. So you, so
you can use that to
move. There's all sorts of
things. Oh, wow. Oh. And
it would actually map directly
to the joystick. So it's
a head tracker, but it's
the Xbox doesn't know it
is. It just thinks it's
a joystick. Right. And you
talked about the wheelchair Mount
and there, the way that
that happens is if you
flip the coin, if you
flip it over, there are
several screw mounts in there
of different sizes that match
a lot of medical, what
medical devices he would use.
So it matches right. To
like a wheelchair Mount. Oh.
So if I understand correctly,
you know how, when you,
like, I've bought a cameras
and there's a standard for
how the camera attaches to
the tripod, and then maybe
you'll look at another device
that you purchase and you
go, Oh, this fits on
top of the tripod because
it uses the same screw
style and size. So you're
saying that there are standards
for mounts. So all of
these things just, just physically
work together. Right. And so
it's, it's, it's really neat.
The amount of thought that
has gone into this, and
yeah, both one of the
things I'm looking at a
picture of this right now,
and on the backside of
the controller with all those
three and a half a
millimeter jacks, there are symbols
on the top. So you
can look down and see
which ones you're, you're needing
to. But then also on
the back in high contrast
and black, larger, there are
symbols right underneath each one
of those as well. So
they've really thought about the
nuances that you might need.
I was involved in the,
in the beta program of
this, and even between the
last beta of the hardware
and the release, they put
a very subtle curve in
the top so that you,
it, it would be a
little bit better ergonomically. Interesting.
And the other thing I
think is worth pointing out
is while it's trying not
to be prescriptive, it's allowing
for accessory makers to themselves
be, be prescriptive, depending on
what you need. For example,
I figured, Oh, well, and
this is speaking from a
relatively able-bodied perspective. I figured,
Oh, well, maybe they'll just
make big buttons, like big,
giant buttons. Right. Which is
a very simplistic way for
me to think. Right. But
I go, and I look
at these accessories from a
company called AbleNet. They have
big switches, which makes sense,
but they also have micro
light switches, switches that will
click with just the slightest
amount of touch or switches,
like a button that happens
when you grab it or
grasp it, or pull it
to one side, or they've
got a jelly bean switch,
which is squishy, but in
not going to hurt you,
if you, if you, if
you pound on it, like
these are all different ways
to send binary information. But
each one for, you know,
it doesn't look like a
switch in the, in the,
in the, in the simplistic
way. I was going to
think that it would look
like right. And that's a
neat thing. I'm glad you
brought up AbleNet because they've
done a wonderful amount for
a lot of people. And
if you go out to
Abel net, one of the
things you'll see on, on
some of the pictures is
it looks like there's almost
a coding over the button.
And the reason, like almost
a plastic transparent coating over
the button. The reason that
is, is for people that
have issues controlling their mouth.
I know of, of a
young man who had, has
wasted several controllers because as
he gets excited through roll
comes out, a lot of
drool comes out and it,
it destroys the controller. So
they even take those sorts
of things into account. And
so it's amazing the small
details that they really look
at to be able to
make sure that it's the
best experience possible, A big
thank you to our sponsors
because they make the show
possible. And I hope that
you support them the way
they support us progress. Software
is the creator of the
most comprehensive developer toolkit for
building modern apps on the
market. Today Tellerik dev craft
with more than 1100 tellerik.net
and Kendo, UI JavaScript components
and controls. You can easily
build modern high-performance web mobile
and desktop apps, as well
as chatbots. The tool set
also includes reporting solutions, automated
testing, and productivity tools, and
come to the range of
support options. New this year
is a free online training
program for all license holders,
with this alongside thousands of
demos and source code available,
comprehensive documentation, and a full
assortment of visual studio templates,
you'll be up and running
with the progress Tellerik and
Kendo UI controls in no
time, download a free 30
day trial today at tellerik.com/hanselman
that's T E L E
R I k.com/hanselman. And this
device has, has software to
support it. And it's firmware
updatable, and I, and it
uploads into windows. So you
program it, you get it
all set up, and then
you can gain both on
Xbox and on in your
windows game And your steam
games. Yes. And then you
just have to map it
however you want. And I
noticed that there's also a
one handed joystick. It was
kind of like a wee
nunchuck. Have you tried that
as a one handed a
user? I haven't, I've tried.
I've used the weed nunchuck
several times, but I haven't
actually used that one yet.
The next one I'm actually
getting is called a 3d
control. I don't remember the
name of it, but it
allows you to move things
with your, basically with your
feet completely with your feet.
It's almost like a balance,
a balance board that you
might use, like when you're
doing a Pilates or something.
Oh, right. There's the 3d
rudder foot controller. Yes. Yes.
It's the 3d rudder. And
so I've got that actually
on an order to play
with to see how I
can use that. And one
of the things I want
to potentially do with that
is help people with accessibility
issues have a better experience
programming. And so maybe the
3d rudder, they can move
the mouse a little bit
better, or find a way
to create some macros for
it. When they're using something
like visual studio code or
visual studio or whatever, to
be able to help that
a little bit more. Now,
I think I know the
answer to this, to this
question, but I've watched my
10 year old, my 12
year old kind of like
develop their skills to be
able to like me, you
know, when you first start
like a first person shooter,
you're walking around and you
can't quite figure out that
the right thumb is your
head and the left thumb
is your body. And you
end up looking up at
the sky or looking down.
And eventually that becomes, you
know, second nature, right after
you set this controller up
and your custom accessories, the
way you want it, whether
it be on a Mount
of your own or a
table, or however, you've set
yourself up, how long does
it take and what does
it like? Does it become
intuitive where you just immediately
know that moving your knee
to the right is the
right trigger and moving into
the left is the left
trigger, or however you set
it up, does it become
natural? Yes. It's just a,
it becomes a habit just
like with any, anything else.
At least it has in
my case. And the neat
thing is, is that if
you have multiple people that
want to use this, you
can have multiple profiles set
up or maybe something works
a little bit better. Another
configuration works better for a
driving game versus a first
person shooter game. You could
have another mapping and change
the change, the controls around
to what makes sense for
that particular game. Wow. Okay.
So the, the controller I
understand is a USBC. It's
got a battery inside. It
really acts like an Xbox
controller. It uses the same,
X-Box wireless. It pairs just
like an Xbox controller. Cause
it is an Xbox controller.
Yeah. For all intents and
purposes, the Xbox thinks it's
an actual controller and they've
used a, I know the
exclusive lab when they were
working on this and the
Xbox hardware team even went
so far is to make
sure that as you're using
this on like for online
tournaments or stuff or things,
I'm sorry, it uses the
anti cheating things that X-Box
would normally use anyway. So
it's not anything that would
be an competitive advantage or
anything like that. They've, they've
tried to make sure that
it just levels the playing
field. Speaking of leveling the
playing field at the beginning
of this podcast, you told
me that when you were
playing before you were effectively,
the, you said the meat
Good for your kids. Yes.
Is this level of, have
you been able to poll
in your kids because that
really is the, the goal,
Right? That's the goal, the
gold standard. And I, I
am now able to hold
at least hold my own.
I get, maybe I get
maybe a couple of, or
two or three kills in
now, before I, before I
get killed. So I'm a
little more challenging me targets.
So, but I have been
able to play almost all
the way through fallout four
with this controller in the
combat scenes and everything else
very effectively. And so I'm
super excited about that. And
then, I don't know if
you saw the launch video
that I'm in with my
fake family there, you do
a fake family. Yeah. At
the a, and w we
do it at the, it
was filmed at the exclusive
lab, but the game that
I'm playing, they just took
about 15 or 20 minutes
of us playing the games.
I'm actually really into it
because it was like a
street fighter game. And I
was actually winning against the
young man that I was
playing against. Whereas before I
would have gotten an, a
couple of shots, but now
with the ability to use
those buttons and, and remap
the controller, it, it just
opened things up and it
just made, it makes it
another way. I don't want
to say in other ways,
dreary existence, because it's not
really, but it's, you know,
you want to play the
games could because you're a
gamer and it gives you
that ability to feel like,
yeah, I can, I can
participate. You know, something else
that's worth pointing out. You
kept mentioning the attention to
detail and the little things
they even made the packaging
yes. Accessible. So like how
often have we all had
to go and find a
knife or a struggle to
open up the carpet? This
thing kind of unfolds itself,
like a flower. And it
has this amazing packaging, both
the, the cardboard around it.
And then the internal box.
It's not packaging that you
would want to throw. No,
actually, I'm, I've still have
the beta version. And I'm
going to, I'm trading that
in for the actual, the
actual release version. And I
can't wait to see the
packaging because the listeners ought
to know that they spent
even, they spent four years
on the controller, but they
spent an entire year on
the packaging. And the way
you open it is with
a little ring that you
just pull back and it
pulls some very, not real
sticky tape off. And then,
yeah, it just unfolds like
a flower, but then it
also slides out gently on
a cardboard, a kind of
lift if you will, so
that you don't have to
re you can just kind
of scoop it off if
you need to. Yeah, exactly.
They're, they're, they're these loops
and they, they set a
standard for no teeth. Yep.
For the package designers, because
people with limited mobility will
often have to use their
teeth to, to open packaging,
which is not, not the
best out of box experience.
Yes. Now, but you get
pretty good at it sometimes,
Unfortunately. So we can get
this where Microsoft stores and
online. Yes. Right now, I
believe it's just at the
micro stores and on back
Microsoft stores and online. But
I have a feeling that
once, once production gets totally
ramped up and everything, that
you'll be able to get
it at best buy or
wherever, you know, Hey, you're
at your local store, maybe.
Yeah. That's fantastic. I'm curious.
Also, do you know if
it has a headset adapter
as well? Like the thing
that I'm always impressed with
my Xbox controllers is I
just plug the headphones in
and they wirelessly bring the
sound over. So back in
the day, I used to
actually have wireless headphones that
were custom and separate. I
plugged into my stereo. And
now the Xbox controller is
itself a, a headphone transmitter.
Yep. I'm not sure about
the wireless headphones. I would
assume that since it's using
it can be done, you
can use it as a
wireless controller. I would assume
that it acts as a
wireless headphones. I guess that's
what I'm saying, right? Well
there, yeah. Cause there is
a three and a half
inch or three and a
half millimeter Jack on the
left side that has a
headphone above it. Yeah. You
can use headphones with it.
Fantastic. See, I, you know,
I think I don't have
mobility issues, but I have
had mobility issues. And I
think this is a thing
for those of us who
are listening to this podcast
who may not have those
issues right now, you just
never know I've had, I've
had frozen shoulder surgery where
I had no mobility in
my left arm for two
years. I had a carpal
tunnel surgery on my right
hand. And I've got a
bone spur in my thumb
right now where my right
hand gaming is painful. We,
we, as we, as relatively
able bodied, people should not
think about technologies like this
as being, you know, Oh,
this is just for people
in wheelchair or this is
just for people with serious
mobility issues. This is really
about making it for everybody.
Like this is what inclusion
means. It's yes. It's for
players with different disabilities or
different abilities, but it may
be well for you. If
someday, if, if something goes
awry in a, in a
body part that you don't
expect, I did not expect
to get frozen shoulder or
have hand issues, but it's
nice to know the controllers
like this exist if I
ever need them. Yes. And
it, it's just another way
to, like you said, be
inclusive and give an Avenue
to people so that they
can participate. Fantastic. All right.
Well, thanks so much, John Alexander
for chatting with me today,
Scott, it's always a pleasure
to talk to you. I
appreciate that this has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
week. .